# Does natural beauty mean chemical-free?

People today are actively researching about the ingredients present in their skin- care products. They seem to have created this notion that applying organic compounds on the skin is safe which is true only to some extent. This notion is due to various brands promoting ‘chemical-free’ and ‘all-natural’ beauty which may be a little misleading. If we look closely, any ingredient from water, lemons, apple cider vinegar etc. to glycerin, sulphates are all considered as chemicals. What actually matters are the formulations and concentrations of each of these ingredients being used in the final product.
The Internet, specifically the social media, is vast platform for various brands to attract customers. People are becoming more conscious about their health and have started to incorporate more natural and clean products into their daily routines. Various brands such as Honest beauty, Florence by Mills have been marketing their products as paraben, talc and sulphate-free products.
Making 100% natural products is not necessarily easy since they turn rancid and cause microbiological contamination. Therefore, various preservatives such as parabens, phenoxyethanol are added to it to increase its shelf life. Various alternatives have been introduced since 2004, when parabens were claimed toxic and harmful. Sodium Benzoate and Potassium Sorbate are some accepted substitutes that are being used in various rinse-off and leave-on products. In the near future there could be a possibility of preservative-free products which would be placed in airtight containers or some even with refrigeration requirements.
Various DIY skincare beauty hacks can also be found floating on the internet. They make use of homemade ingredients like oat bran, baking soda, honey, turmeric etc. which may or may not work on every skin-type. Bella Thorne, American actress and singer, was heavily criticized for her all- natural DIY nighttime skincare routine with Harper’s Bazaar*. She made use of ingredients like olive oil, lemons, cherries and sugar granules which looks very heathy and safe but can be slightly harmful. Olive oil may be anti-bacterial but is not emulsifying and can result in clogging of skin and sugar, on the other hand, is over exfoliating her acne-prone skin.  Hence it is of utmost importance to get it approved by a dermatologist or an aesthetician.
According to an assessment done by CIR** (Cosmetic Ingredient Review), botanicals, such as Cocos nucifera (coconut) derived ingredients, may contain hundreds of components, some of which may have the potential to cause toxic effects. But at the same time, coconut oil is naturally anti-bacterial, anti-fungal, anti-inflammatory and moisturizing. Coconut oil is composed mainly of nourishing fatty acids and contains vitamin E. Another example is lemon, which is rich in Vitamin C and helps getting rid of blackheads but at the same time is acidic in nature thus affecting the natural pH of the skin and causing skin irritation. Generations of Indian women have been using these in a variety of food and beverage as well. Hence the idea is to use any substance, whether it is a formula designed in laboratory or a leaf or flower extract, in appropriate quantities and form.

[Download report of safety of various chemicals:][https://www.cir-safety.org/sites/default/files/SQ-122017revised072018.pdf]

[**CIR: Safety Assessment of Cocos nucifera (Coconut)-Derived Ingredients as Used in Cosmetics][https://www.cir-safety.org/sites/default/files/Coconut.pdf]

[*Bella Thorne's All-Natural, DIY Nighttime Skincare Routine | Go To Bed With Me | Harper's BAZAAR interview[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lTqQLTvJLAQ]
